Caesar Essay Topics


***Do not fixate on a topic as being more meaningful than another; it’s always how you choose to analyze a topic that matters versus the actual subject of the topic. Every one of these topics can be adapted or combined or altered, etc., to make them “your own” should you choose. Most importantly, any topic you choose must have some greater thematic significance. What does your analysis indicate about humanity as a whole? What greater universal purpose is being addressed? THIS is where you find that elusive depth that leads to that treasured A so many of you fixate upon… YOU CAN ALWAYS CREATE YOUR OWN TOPIC.


1. A tragic hero is an honorable protagonist with a tragic flaw, which eventually leads to his demise. How does Brutus reflect this characterization and what greater thematic purpose does his tragic heroism convey? (Hint: in order to truly address this, you must identify his tragic flaw and examine the social and/or human constructs that contribute to this flaw…)


2. Is Brutus a villain or a hero, and what does his status reveal on a thematic level? (Hint: This isn’t an easy answer.)


3. Discuss the power, or lack thereof, of omens and fate in Julius Caesar. What is Shakespeare trying to convey through his use of omens/fate? (Don’t just “list” omens.)


4. Discuss the role of women in Julius Caesar. You may compare/contrast Portia and Calpurnia, or choose one and focus on her. (Again, this will need thematic purpose/analysis. Just saying they lack the power of men is a given.)


5. Does a single hero or villain exist in Julius Caesar? If so, who? (Or what?) Explain your reasoning in relation to a specific thematic purpose. Why does this character hold this status? What does it prove?


6. Discuss the power of speech and/or the written word in Julius Caesar. (Be very careful of simply stating the obvious here. What does this power prove?)


7. Discuss the power of deception and manipulation in Julius Caesar. (Be very careful of simply stating the obvious here… This dangerous topic is good, but it often goes poorly because students simply list lies/deception instead of analyzing their thematic significance.)


8. Compare and contrast the private and public sides of Brutus and/or Caesar. What does this reveal about human nature and governance, etc? What does this reveal as a whole? 


9. How is loyalty portrayed in Julius Caesar? Please specifically address Antony, Brutus, and/or Cassius in relation to Caesar. Is there truly any genuine loyalty present? Is it even possible within hierarchies? Analyze the reasons behind your response. 


10. Idealism often leads to downfall. Support this statement with references to the text. (From what societal or human flaw does this idealism stem? THIS last part is where you will find that meaty thematic purpose…)