Student [o]
  
Freshman Student
Mrs. Pagtakhan
6th Period Freshman Eng
[a]
13 November 2020
What a Lonely World: Isolation in Steinbeck’s Of Mice and Men
Of all the people who touch the heart, friends and family are the most deeply felt. Their absence breeds loneliness with terrible consequences.[b] During the 1930s, migrant farm workers moved from ranch to ranch, leaving friends and family behind with every quick departure. Each move resulted in further separation, complete with its harmful results. In his novel, Of Mice and Men, Steinbeck displays the tragic and damaging cycle of loneliness through broken ranch workers who often behave callously as a reaction to their own isolation, only to extend this painful cycle of isolation.
Crooks, discriminated against for being African-American, is isolated by the other ranch-hands, and the loneliness he faces causes him to become distant and cruel. When he acts this way, no one wants to befriend him, furthering his loneliness and perpetuating the cycle. [c]Because of his segregation, Crooks is “a proud, aloof man. He [keeps] [d]his distance and [demands] that other [people] keep theirs” (67). The White people on the ranch regard Crooks as an outsider; unfortunately for him, Whites make up the majority of the ranch. This forces Crooks into isolation, resulting in his own unfriendly and antisocial behavior because he has had no means to establish his social skills. When Lennie approaches Crooks for company, Crooks is surprised because he is not used to someone taking any interest in him. Distrustful of this unusual attempt at socializing, Crooks acts defensively by telling Lennie he has “no right to come in” because it is “[his] room” (68). Reluctantly, Crooks allows Lennie to enter, but he does not quite know how to behave once Lennie offers him the companionship Crooks so desperately desires. Crooks even taunts Lennie, warning him, “Jus’[e] s’pose [George] [f][g][h]don’t come back…they’ll tie ya up with a collar, like a dog” (72). Rather than welcome this chance at new friendship, friendship he desperately desires, Crooks instead responds with cruelty. If Crooks had more experience in positive social interactions, he would be more open to Lennie’s attempt to befriend him. Shocked by the mere idea of another person in his room, Crooks perpetuates a vicious cycle of anger and loneliness. Because he is unwanted among the other ranchers, Crooks tells Lennie to “go on get outta [his] room. [He] ain’t wanted in the bunk house, and [Lennie] ain’t wanted in [Crooks’] room” (68). [i]Although Lennie means him no harm, Crooks is immediately defensive and mean spirited. He has been hurt so many times and is so lonely that he creates a shield to defend himself from the brutal outside world. This failed interaction with Lennie reveals why Crooks is so alone: he has become withdrawn and dejected, incapable of fostering friendship. He sees friendship as a wasteful lesson in futility, one where he will most likely end up hurt or betrayed. Rather than face this vulnerability, Crooks turns this loneliness into bitterness. In doing so, Crooks keeps others away, continuing the cycle of loneliness and misery. 
        As a traveling farm laborer, Carlson constantly moves, which prevents him from fostering lasting friendships, and as a result, he becomes insensitive, and even ignorant, to others’ feelings[j]. Carlson is callously oblivious to his own lack of empathy. When Candy pleads to keep his aged dog alive for at least one more day, Carlson “[sees] no reason for it” (47). Carlson has no idea Candy truly loves his dog and is heartbroken at the thought of its death. Carlson is so out of touch, he cannot even understand the notion of love. Carlson goes so far as “to clean the barrel of [the] pistol” he just used to kill Candy’s dog right beside Candy’s bunk, never even noticing how “Candy had turned his back to the wall” in sadness (52). Carlson’s heartless reaction magnifies at the novel’s end in regard to Lennie’s tragic death. When George reluctantly shoots Lennie and seeks support from Slim, Carlson, who does not understand why George and Slim are upset, wonders to Curley, “What the hell you suppose is eatin’ them two guys?” (107). Since Carlson does not comprehend love or caring for anyone, he does not understand why George would be grieving for a lost friend. Because he is so unaware of friendship, Carlson cannot be a friend to anyone; he is incapable of empathy. Steinbeck closes his novel with this one cold line, leaving readers with this final poignant message. Carlson never befriends anyone because his reaction to being alone is cold insensitivity and distance, leading to more loneliness and thus continuing the horrific cycle.[k]
        [l]The damaged characters in Of Mice and Men face the same isolation as outcasts in the real world, whether they are an African-American in the Jim Crow era or a migrant rancher. As a result, they are unbearably lonely; with no one to turn to, they become cruel and aloof, or simply callously insensitive. [m]Connection requires empathy and compassion, both made impossible within the confines of isolation. Loneliness negatively affects everyone it touches. No one should be forced to be alone, no matter who society rejects. Steinbeck reminds his readers they must work toward abolishing loneliness to make the world a better and even safer place, for it is only through reaching out to others in kindness that humanity grows[n].
[a]This essay is shortened from its original so that we can review it in a more timely fashion. There was additional commentary to support the claims. There is an additional paragraph on Curley's Wife in the original that I removed for the sake of timing.
[b]The first sentence of an intro should NEVER mention the text in ANY way--not the author, not the title, not a character, etc. NOTHING at all about books or plays or writing. Period. Instead, consider the theme/topic of your thesis. In this case, the subject is loneliness, so the first sentences addresses loneliness as a general concept. DO NOT START WITH A QUESTION, QUOTE, OR DEFINITION!!
[c]This TS goes beyond summary by including thoughtful commentary that ties back to the thesis. It does not just state the obvious by saying Crooks is lonely because he is the only Black man on the racist ranch; it goes beyond that to address the outcomes of this loneliness and examines the "cycle" aspect the thesis brings up. Also, this TS is essentially two sentences long. It includes expansion in a 2nd sentence to clarify the TS for further depth.
[d]Note how this word is in brackets. That is because the tense is changed in order to blend properly with the writer's words. Anytime you alter a quote in any way, you must put that word in brackets to indicate this change. You may NEVER change the context or meaning of a quote to suit your own needs, but you may make changes for fluency and clarity. Please bracket the entire word rather than just the letter(s) you changed. Brackets are a necessary and common indicator of strong quote embedding. Use them with tense shifts, pronoun shifts, added words to help with flow, etc.
[e]This is a direct quote, so it needs a comma. Every once in a while, a direct quote rather than a blended quote will work just fine. But a good way to see it is to know that you can easily write an entire essay with zero direct quotes, and it can easily earn an A; however, if an essay in comprised of entirely direct quotes rather than blended ones, it indicates lower level writing.
[f]This is in brackets because in the novel, Crooks says "he," but that would be confusing here, so the writer rightfully changed this to "George" for clarity. Thus, the brackets are needed.
[g]_Marked as resolved_
[h]_Re-opened_
[i]This is a great example of how you can take dialogue and still blend it; it just takes changing the pronouns and splicing out some parts so that it no longer presents as dialogue.
[j]The D essay stops after "moves"; the C/B- essay stops after the word "friendships"; the B/A essay stops after "feelings." Stopping after "feelings" gives greater thematic purpose to Carlson's isolation. The goal is not to prove he is isolated; that is a GIVEN. The goal is to deepen this concept by addressing and analyzing both the causes and outcomes of this loneliness
[k]Make sure that concluding sentence MENTIONS THE TEXT and goes beyond summary. (It is NOT a broad statement that does not mention the text; save that for the conclusion paragraph.)
[l]Note the way this conclusion goes from specific to broad, which is the opposite structure as the introduction. This means the first sentence MUST mention the text by repeating the thesis, and the last sentence of the conclusion must never mention the text because it is a broad statement. In other words, the conclusion is pretty much the same as your intro, just in reverse order.
[m]The first sentence of the conclusion is always merely a repeat of the thesis, but in different words. It MUST mention the text, unlike the first sentence of the intro. Thus, a conclusion is the inverse structure of an intro.
[n]The conclusion broadly leaves the text by making a statement about society as a whole in relation to the specific theme of the novel & essay.
[o]Always use a HEADER instead of typing this directly on the page. This means it will automatically apply to all pages so you don't have to keep retyping it and messing up your formatting. Make sure to use the page number feature instead of typing the page # manually (so it doesn't say "1" on every page...).